# Core form of the language

I've been thinking about how to start implementing this (both in terms of the
language for the initial prototype and the compilations steps). Before we reach
the AST stage I believe there should be a minimal "core" of the language which
is used to process all the type information and ease out the conversion to AST.

This will leave us with the following layers:
	* a code form
	* the converter from code -> core form (pre-processor)
	* a core form
	* the converter from core -> ast
	* ast form
	* either virtual runtime OR someway of converting this to machine code

First version will definitely be based on a virtual runtime.

This doc is a bunch of notes; expect inconsistencies, logical flaws and
unstructured content

## Why not convert directly to AST?

The way I want to do the type system we need to tag each reference with
information about how it's used. For instance the code:

```
a = 1
a = when somecond < 255 -> a + somecond
```

Without knowing anything about `somevar` we can tell that `a` will never be
larger than 255; meaning this can be a unsigned 8 bit integer.

If we convert this directly to AST inferring these properties will become
difficult and the AST will be cluttered with irrelevant constructs not used
during the runtime.

## The core form

Lets take the minimal example from my previous article:

```
a = 1
debug when
	a > 1 -> a - 1
	_ -> 0
```

After it's been tokenized we can generate the core form, the pre-processor
would step through the tokenized code and update the information about the
relevant code block (hint: in our code there is only one block)

```
- #_$0 (type: Any) // this is a code block
- #a$1 (type: Integer, value: 1, min: 1, max: 1)
- debug (type: Any)
 - when (type: Any)
	- -> (type: Integer, inference(#a$1, min: #a$1.min - 1)) // update for inference
	- -> (type: Integer, value: 0, min: 0, max: 0)
```

A variable reference can be seen by `#<ref-name>$<line>`, whilst a function
call takes whatever type info it matches.

So for our example the core form would look like:

```
$# :: (type: Integer, min: 0, max: 1) {
	assing a :: ($# | line: 1), 1 // assign variable `a` with typeinfo inherited from the block to the value of 1
	debug :: ($# | line: 2)
		when :: ($# | line: 2)
			-> a :: ($# | line: 3) > 1, - a, 1
			-> a :: (type: Integer, min: 0, max: 0, line: 4), 0
}
```

The corm form is looks alot like the code form of the language with the exceptions:
	* postfix notation
	* whitespace sensitive
	* EVERYTHING is annotated with type

Now the preprocessor may give us feedback, for instance lets assume some code
with type some definite type violation:

```
a :: (type: integer) = + // assign the function `+`
```

The core form would show us:
```
assign a :: (type: Integer, line: 1), + :: (type: Function, line: 1)
```

This type violation would be picked up immediately, and the pre-processor
should tell us something like:

	Type error: assigning a value of type `Function` to `a` when `Integer` was expected

## Iteratively validating types and type succession

On definition of a variable the pre-processor should set the type. Once a
the variable is updated later on we can update the type-properties (like `min`
and `max`) but we can't update the actual type so defining something as a
Integer first will trigger an error if the programmer tries to assign a String
later on.

A variable will only exist within code block (a module, function, ???) and the
typing from that block will be updated. For successive typing this becomes
slightly more complicated: we must think of a code block as a structured definition
that must be parsed and understood before we can mix in the external types.

An example with some more extensive code should do (written in iterative pseudo-core-form)


```
Array.new :: (type: array)
- => (a :: (type: integer), b :: (type: integer)) :: (type: integer)
+ => (a :: (type: integer), b :: (type: integer)) :: (type: integer)

$# :: $#Array.new {
	module :: (type: map) {
		increment => (a :: $#+.0, b :: $#+.1) :: (type: function, return: $#+) {
			+ a, b
		}

		decrement => (a :: $#-.0, b :: $#-.1) :: (type: function, return: $#-) {
			- a, b
		}
	}

	$#1 :: $# {
		assign initial :: (type: integer, min: 35, max: 35) = 35
		assign change :: (type: integer, min: 70, max: 70) = 70

		# here we don't know what `module.increment` will do
		assign incremented :: $#module.increment, module.increment initial, change
		assign decremented :: $#module.decrement, module.decrement initial, change

		# we don't event know what this weird array construct does yet means yet
		Array.new(incremented, decremented)
	}
}
```

Now the only thing we can know for sure at this point is that we will be
returned an array, from the code we can infer that the block will return
a array of length 2 where both elements are a numbers.
At the moment the definition of `+` and `-` are extremely general, but with a
twinkle of magic we can find out the bounds of the array returned:

```
# we can define the successive typing of `-`
- => (
	a :: (type: integer)
	b :: (type: integer)
) :: (type: integer, min: $#a.min - $#b.max, max: $#a.max - $#b.min)

# the type of
assign a :: (type: int, max: 255, min: 0), 1
assign b :: (type: int, max: 255, min: 0), 2

assign val :: _, (- a, b) :: (type: int, max: 255, min: -255)

nextStep => (a :: (type: integer, min: 1024)) :: (type: integer, min: 1024, max: 2048)
when
	val > 255 -> "warn" # we can warn users that this will never happend
	val -> nextStep val # we infer that this is a type violation
```
